README.md, before:

# yosys-syn

The `yosys-syn` project is an open source synthesis plugin for [Yosys](https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys) with support for the [Zero ASIC Platypus FPGAs](https://www.zeroasic.com/platypus). The plugin also includes experimental configuration support that enables synthesis for hardware targets beyond the Platypus FPGAs.

The `yosys-syn` synthesis recipes represent a significant improvement over existing open source synthesis tools and even compares favorably with state-of-the-art commercial proprietary FPGA tools. The tables below illustrate the synthesis results for various architectures for the [picorv32 CPU](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/zeroasiccorp/logikbench/refs/heads/main/logikbench/blocks/picorv32/rtl/picorv32.v). For a complete set of RTL benchmarks, see the [LogikBench project](https://github.com/zeroasiccorp/logikbench).


## LUT4 Architectures

| Architecture | Tool      | Synthesis Command      | LUTs   | Logic Depth |
|--------------|-----------|------------------------|:------:|:-----------:|
| ice40        | yosys     | synth_ice40            |        |             |
| z1010        | yosys-syn | synth_fpga             |        |             |
| z1010        | yosys-syn | synth_fpga -opt delay  |        |             |

## LUT6 Architectures

| Architecture | Tool      | Synthesis Command      | LUTs   | Logic Depth |
|--------------|-----------|------------------------|:------:|:-----------:|
| Vendor-1     | vendor    | (proprietary)          |        |             |
| Vendor-2     | vendor    | (proprietary)          |        |             |
| xc7          | yosys     | synth_xilinx           |        |             |
| z1XXX        | yosys-syn | synth_fpga             |        |             |
| z1XXX        | yosys-syn | synth_fpga -opt delay  |        |             |

## Prerequisites

* Compiler: >=GCC 11 or >=clang 17
* CMake: 3.20 ... 3.29
* Yosys: >=0.47

## Building

```bash
git clone git@github.com:zeroasiccorp/yosys-syn.git
cd yosys-syn
cmake -S . -B build
cmake --build build
sudo cmake --install build
```

> **NOTE:** The `cmake` flow builds the plugin and copies all files to the yosys executable share directory. As an example, if the `yosys` executable is located at /usr/local/bin/yosys, then the `yosys-syn` plugin will be copied to /usr/local/share/yosys/plugins/yosys-syn.so.

## Quickstart

You can load the `yosys-syn` plugin into Yosys on startup using the -m argument:

```bash
yosys -m yosys-syn
```

Alternatively you can load the plugin at runtime via the `plugin` command:


```
yosys> plugin -i yosys-syn
```

Once the plugin is loaded, you are ready to run synthesis.

The following "hello world" example runs synthesis on the [picorv32 CPU](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/zeroasiccorp/logikbench/refs/heads/main/logikbench/blocks/picorv32/rtl/picorv32.v). We encourage you to try your own RTL and report back results.

```
read_verilog picorv32.v
hierarchy -check -top picorv32
synth_fpga -partname Z1010
```

## Limitations

* No carry chain inference
* No tri-state circuit inference
* No latch inference

## Command Options

To get a listing of all `synth_fpga` options, use the yosys built-in `help` command.

```
yosys> help synth_fpga

synth_fpga [options]

This command runs Zero ASIC FPGA synthesis flow.

    -top <module>
        Use the specified module as top module, in case more than one exists.

    -opt <mode>
        Specifies optimization mode [area, delay] (default=area).

    -partname <name>
        Specifies architecture partname [Z1000, Z1010]. (default=Z1000).

    -config <file name>
        Specifies config file containing FPGA architecture target parameters.
        If not specified, the -partname value is used to set synthesis target.

    -no_flatten
        Disable design flattening.

    -no_bram
        Disable BRAM inference.

    -no_dsp
        Bypass DSP inference. It is off by default.

    -no_dff_in_dsp
        Specifies to not pack DFF in DSPs. This is off by default.

    -no_xor_tree_process
        Disable xor trees depth reduction in DELAY optimization mode.

    -no_dff_enable
        Disables mapping to DFF with enable.

    -no_dff_async_set
        Disable mapping to DFF with asynchronous set.

    -no_dff_async_reset
        Disable mapping to DFF with asynchronous reset.

    -no_opt_sat_dff
        Disable SAT-based DFF optimizations.

    -no_opt_const_dff
        Disable constant driven DFF optimization.

    -no_sdff
        Disable synchronous set/reset DFF mapping.

    -fsm_encoding [one-hot, binary]
        Specifies FSM encoding : by default a 'one-hot' encoding is performed.

    -resynthesis
        Runs in resynthesis mode which means a lighter touch flow.
        It can be used only after performing a first 'synth_fpga' synthesis pass

    -autoname
        Generate wire and cells names that mimic RTL (instead of generic
        $abc names). Possibly significant runtime impact. (default=off)

    -set_dff_init_value_to_zero
        Set un-initialized DFF to initial value 0. Insert double inverters for DFF
        with initial value 1 and switch its initial value to 0 and modify its
        clear/set/reset functionalities if any.

    -show_dff_init_value
        Show DFF initial values in RTL.

    -continue_if_latch
        Keep running even if latches are inferred.

    -stop_if_undriven_nets
        Stop synthesis if the final netlist has undriven nets.

    -obs_clean
        Overrides built-in Yosys 'opt_clean' function.

    -lut_size
        Specifies lut size. (default=4).

    -verilog <file>
        Writes out design to the specified file.

    -show_max_level
        Show longest paths.

    -csv <file>
        Dump synthesis statistics to file.

    -wait
        Wait after each 'stat' for user to press <enter> key.

    -show_config
        Show the parameters set by the config file.

```

## FPGA Specification Format
------------------------
The FPGA configuration option makes the `synth_fpga` command a powerful general purpose synthesis plugin rather than a bespoke command targeted at a single FPGA hardware target.

```
yosys > synth_fpga -config <configuration file>
```

The configuration format is still work in progress. A draft format specification is shown below.

```
{
        "version": <int, version of file schema, current version is 1>,
        "partname": <str, name of the fpga part>,
        "root_path": <path, absolute path where all other paths are relative to>, (optional),
        "lut_size": <int, size of lut>,
        "flipflops": {
                "features": [<str, list of features file async_set, flop_enable, async_reset, etc.>],
                "models": {
                        "<str, ff name>": <path, relative path to DFFs model file>
                },
                "techmap": <path, relative path to yosys DFFs tech mapping file>
        },
        "brams": { (optional)
                "memory_libmap": [<path, relative path to yosys memory mapping file>, ...],
                "memory_libmap_parameters": [<parameter setting>, ...] (optional),
                "techmap": [<path, relative path to yosys memory tech mapping>, ...]
        },
        "dsps": { (optional)
                "family": <str, name of dsp family>,
                "techmap": <path, relative path to yosys dsp tech mapping file>,
                "techmap_parameters": {
                        "<str, name of define>": <str or int, value of define>
                }
                "pack_command": "DSP packing command" (optional)
        }
}
```

Sections version, partname, lut_size, flip-flops, are required. Sections root_path, brams,and dsps are optional. If "root_path" is not specified, it will correspond to the path where the config file is located.

### Logic Only Example: No BRAMs or DSPs

```
{
    "version": 1,
    "partname": "z1000",
    "lut_size": 4,
    "flipflops": {
        "features": ["async_reset", "async_set", "flop_enable"],
        "models": {
            "dffers": "/ffs/dffers.v",
            "dffer": "/ffs/dffer.v",
            "dffes": "/ffs/dffes.v",
            "dffe": "/ffs/dffe.v",
            "dffrs": "/ffs/dffrs.v",
            "dffr": "/ffs/dffr.v",
            "dffs": "/ffs/dffs.v",
            "dff": "/ffs/dff.v"
        },
        "techmap": "/tech_flops.v"
    }
}
```
### Full Example: With BRAMs and DSPs

```json
{
    "version": 1,
    "partname": "z1010",
    "lut_size": 4,
    "flipflops": {
        "features": ["async_reset", "async_set", "flop_enable"],
        "models": {
            "dffers": "/ffs/dffers.v",
            "dffer": "/ffs/dffer.v",
            "dffes": "/ffs/dffes.v",
            "dffe": "/ffs/dffe.v",
            "dffrs": "/ffs/dffrs.v",
            "dffr": "/ffs/dffr.v",
            "dffs": "/ffs/dffs.v",
            "dff": "/ffs/dff.v"
        },
        "techmap": "/tech_flops.v"
    },
    "brams": {
        "memory_libmap": ["/bram_memory_map.txt"],
        "techmap": ["/tech_bram.v"]
    },
    "dsps": {
        "family": "DSP48",
        "techmap": "/mult18x18_DSP48.v",
        "techmap_parameters": {
            "DSP_A_MAXWIDTH": 18,
            "DSP_B_MAXWIDTH": 18,
            "DSP_A_MINWIDTH": 2,
            "DSP_B_MINWIDTH": 2,
            "DSP_Y_MINWIDTH": 9,
            "DSP_SIGNEDONLY": 1,
            "DSP_NAME": "$__MUL18X18"
        }
    }
}
```
### Third Party Example: With BRAM and DSPs
```json
{
  "version": 2,
  "partname": "z1010",
  "lut_size": 4,
  "root_path" : "/home/user/YOSYS_DYN/yosys/yosys-syn/",
  "flipflops": {
                "features": ["async_reset", "async_set", "flop_enable"],
                "models": {
                        "dffers": "SRC/ff_models/dffers.v",
                        "dffer": "SRC/ff_models/dffer.v",
                        "dffes": "SRC/ff_models/dffes.v",
                        "dffe": "SRC/ff_models/dffe.v",
                        "dffrs": "SRC/ff_models/dffrs.v",
                        "dffr": "SRC/ff_models/dffr.v",
                        "dffs": "SRC/ff_models/dffs.v",
                        "dff": "SRC/ff_models/dff.v"
                },
                "techmap": "architecture/z1010/techlib/tech_flops.v"
        },
  "brams": {
            "memory_libmap": [ "architecture/z1010/bram/LSRAM.txt",
                               "architecture/z1010/bram/uSRAM.txt"],
            "memory_libmap_parameters": ["-logic-cost-rom 0.5"],
            "techmap": ["architecture/z1010/bram/LSRAM_map.v",
                        "architecture/z1010/bram/uSRAM_map.v"]
        },
  "dsps": {
          "family": "microchip",
          "techmap": "../techlibs/microchip/polarfire_dsp_map.v",
          "techmap_parameters": {
                   "DSP_A_MAXWIDTH": 18,
                   "DSP_B_MAXWIDTH": 18,
                   "DSP_A_MAXWIDTH_PARTIAL": 18,
                   "DSP_A_MINWIDTH": 2,
                   "DSP_B_MINWIDTH": 2,
                   "DSP_Y_MINWIDTH": 9,
                   "DSP_SIGNEDONLY": 1,
                   "DSP_NAME": "$__MUL18X18"
          },
          "pack_command": "microchip_dsp -family polarfire"
       }
}
```

Commit message:

replace yosys-syn reference by wildebeest

README.md, after:

# wildebeest

The `wildebeest` project is an open source synthesis plugin for [Yosys](https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys) with support for the [Zero ASIC Platypus FPGAs](https://www.zeroasic.com/platypus). The plugin also includes experimental configuration support that enables synthesis for hardware targets beyond the Platypus FPGAs.

The `wildebeest` synthesis recipes represent a significant improvement over existing open source synthesis tools and even compares favorably with state-of-the-art commercial proprietary FPGA tools. The tables below illustrate the synthesis results for various architectures for the [picorv32 CPU](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/zeroasiccorp/logikbench/refs/heads/main/logikbench/blocks/picorv32/rtl/picorv32.v). For a complete set of RTL benchmarks, see the [LogikBench project](https://github.com/zeroasiccorp/logikbench).


## LUT4 Architectures

| Architecture | Tool      | Synthesis Command      | LUTs   | Logic Depth |
|--------------|-----------|------------------------|:------:|:-----------:|
| ice40        | yosys     | synth_ice40            |        |             |
| z1010        | wildebeest | synth_fpga             |        |             |
| z1010        | wildebeest | synth_fpga -opt delay  |        |             |

## LUT6 Architectures

| Architecture | Tool      | Synthesis Command      | LUTs   | Logic Depth |
|--------------|-----------|------------------------|:------:|:-----------:|
| Vendor-1     | vendor    | (proprietary)          |        |             |
| Vendor-2     | vendor    | (proprietary)          |        |             |
| xc7          | yosys     | synth_xilinx           |        |             |
| z1XXX        | wildebeest | synth_fpga             |        |             |
| z1XXX        | wildebeest | synth_fpga -opt delay  |        |             |

## Prerequisites

* Compiler: >=GCC 11 or >=clang 17
* CMake: 3.20 ... 3.29
* Yosys: >=0.47

## Building

```bash
git clone git@github.com:zeroasiccorp/wildebeest.git
cd wildebeest
cmake -S . -B build
cmake --build build
sudo cmake --install build
```

> **NOTE:** The `cmake` flow builds the plugin and copies all files to the yosys executable share directory. As an example, if the `yosys` executable is located at /usr/local/bin/yosys, then the `wildebeest` plugin will be copied to /usr/local/share/yosys/plugins/wildebeest.so.

## Quickstart

You can load the `wildebeest` plugin into Yosys on startup using the -m argument:

```bash
yosys -m wildebeest
```

Alternatively you can load the plugin at runtime via the `plugin` command:


```
yosys> plugin -i wildebeest
```

Once the plugin is loaded, you are ready to run synthesis.

The following "hello world" example runs synthesis on the [picorv32 CPU](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/zeroasiccorp/logikbench/refs/heads/main/logikbench/blocks/picorv32/rtl/picorv32.v). We encourage you to try your own RTL and report back results.

```
read_verilog picorv32.v
hierarchy -check -top picorv32
synth_fpga -partname Z1010
```

## Limitations

* No carry chain inference
* No tri-state circuit inference
* No latch inference

## Command Options

To get a listing of all `synth_fpga` options, use the yosys built-in `help` command.

```
yosys> help synth_fpga

synth_fpga [options]

This command runs Zero ASIC FPGA synthesis flow.

    -top <module>
        Use the specified module as top module, in case more than one exists.

    -opt <mode>
        Specifies optimization mode [area, delay] (default=area).

    -partname <name>
        Specifies architecture partname [Z1000, Z1010]. (default=Z1000).

    -config <file name>
        Specifies config file containing FPGA architecture target parameters.
        If not specified, the -partname value is used to set synthesis target.

    -no_flatten
        Disable design flattening.

    -no_bram
        Disable BRAM inference.

    -no_dsp
        Bypass DSP inference. It is off by default.

    -no_dff_in_dsp
        Specifies to not pack DFF in DSPs. This is off by default.

    -no_xor_tree_process
        Disable xor trees depth reduction in DELAY optimization mode.

    -no_dff_enable
        Disables mapping to DFF with enable.

    -no_dff_async_set
        Disable mapping to DFF with asynchronous set.

    -no_dff_async_reset
        Disable mapping to DFF with asynchronous reset.

    -no_opt_sat_dff
        Disable SAT-based DFF optimizations.

    -no_opt_const_dff
        Disable constant driven DFF optimization.

    -no_sdff
        Disable synchronous set/reset DFF mapping.

    -fsm_encoding [one-hot, binary]
        Specifies FSM encoding : by default a 'one-hot' encoding is performed.

    -resynthesis
        Runs in resynthesis mode which means a lighter touch flow.
        It can be used only after performing a first 'synth_fpga' synthesis pass

    -autoname
        Generate wire and cells names that mimic RTL (instead of generic
        $abc names). Possibly significant runtime impact. (default=off)

    -set_dff_init_value_to_zero
        Set un-initialized DFF to initial value 0. Insert double inverters for DFF
        with initial value 1 and switch its initial value to 0 and modify its
        clear/set/reset functionalities if any.

    -show_dff_init_value
        Show DFF initial values in RTL.

    -continue_if_latch
        Keep running even if latches are inferred.

    -stop_if_undriven_nets
        Stop synthesis if the final netlist has undriven nets.

    -obs_clean
        Overrides built-in Yosys 'opt_clean' function.

    -lut_size
        Specifies lut size. (default=4).

    -verilog <file>
        Writes out design to the specified file.

    -show_max_level
        Show longest paths.

    -csv <file>
        Dump synthesis statistics to file.

    -wait
        Wait after each 'stat' for user to press <enter> key.

    -show_config
        Show the parameters set by the config file.

```

## FPGA Specification Format
------------------------
The FPGA configuration option makes the `synth_fpga` command a powerful general purpose synthesis plugin rather than a bespoke command targeted at a single FPGA hardware target.

```
yosys > synth_fpga -config <configuration file>
```

The configuration format is still work in progress. A draft format specification is shown below.

```
{
        "version": <int, version of file schema, current version is 1>,
        "partname": <str, name of the fpga part>,
        "root_path": <path, absolute path where all other paths are relative to>, (optional),
        "lut_size": <int, size of lut>,
        "flipflops": {
                "features": [<str, list of features file async_set, flop_enable, async_reset, etc.>],
                "models": {
                        "<str, ff name>": <path, relative path to DFFs model file>
                },
                "techmap": <path, relative path to yosys DFFs tech mapping file>
        },
        "brams": { (optional)
                "memory_libmap": [<path, relative path to yosys memory mapping file>, ...],
                "memory_libmap_parameters": [<parameter setting>, ...] (optional),
                "techmap": [<path, relative path to yosys memory tech mapping>, ...]
        },
        "dsps": { (optional)
                "family": <str, name of dsp family>,
                "techmap": <path, relative path to yosys dsp tech mapping file>,
                "techmap_parameters": {
                        "<str, name of define>": <str or int, value of define>
                }
                "pack_command": "DSP packing command" (optional)
        }
}
```

Sections version, partname, lut_size, flip-flops, are required. Sections root_path, brams,and dsps are optional. If "root_path" is not specified, it will correspond to the path where the config file is located.

### Logic Only Example: No BRAMs or DSPs

```
{
    "version": 1,
    "partname": "z1000",
    "lut_size": 4,
    "flipflops": {
        "features": ["async_reset", "async_set", "flop_enable"],
        "models": {
            "dffers": "/ffs/dffers.v",
            "dffer": "/ffs/dffer.v",
            "dffes": "/ffs/dffes.v",
            "dffe": "/ffs/dffe.v",
            "dffrs": "/ffs/dffrs.v",
            "dffr": "/ffs/dffr.v",
            "dffs": "/ffs/dffs.v",
            "dff": "/ffs/dff.v"
        },
        "techmap": "/tech_flops.v"
    }
}
```
### Full Example: With BRAMs and DSPs

```json
{
    "version": 1,
    "partname": "z1010",
    "lut_size": 4,
    "flipflops": {
        "features": ["async_reset", "async_set", "flop_enable"],
        "models": {
            "dffers": "/ffs/dffers.v",
            "dffer": "/ffs/dffer.v",
            "dffes": "/ffs/dffes.v",
            "dffe": "/ffs/dffe.v",
            "dffrs": "/ffs/dffrs.v",
            "dffr": "/ffs/dffr.v",
            "dffs": "/ffs/dffs.v",
            "dff": "/ffs/dff.v"
        },
        "techmap": "/tech_flops.v"
    },
    "brams": {
        "memory_libmap": ["/bram_memory_map.txt"],
        "techmap": ["/tech_bram.v"]
    },
    "dsps": {
        "family": "DSP48",
        "techmap": "/mult18x18_DSP48.v",
        "techmap_parameters": {
            "DSP_A_MAXWIDTH": 18,
            "DSP_B_MAXWIDTH": 18,
            "DSP_A_MINWIDTH": 2,
            "DSP_B_MINWIDTH": 2,
            "DSP_Y_MINWIDTH": 9,
            "DSP_SIGNEDONLY": 1,
            "DSP_NAME": "$__MUL18X18"
        }
    }
}
```
### Third Party Example: With BRAM and DSPs
```json
{
  "version": 2,
  "partname": "z1010",
  "lut_size": 4,
  "root_path" : "/home/user/YOSYS_DYN/yosys/wildebeest/",
  "flipflops": {
                "features": ["async_reset", "async_set", "flop_enable"],
                "models": {
                        "dffers": "SRC/ff_models/dffers.v",
                        "dffer": "SRC/ff_models/dffer.v",
                        "dffes": "SRC/ff_models/dffes.v",
                        "dffe": "SRC/ff_models/dffe.v",
                        "dffrs": "SRC/ff_models/dffrs.v",
                        "dffr": "SRC/ff_models/dffr.v",
                        "dffs": "SRC/ff_models/dffs.v",
                        "dff": "SRC/ff_models/dff.v"
                },
                "techmap": "architecture/z1010/techlib/tech_flops.v"
        },
  "brams": {
            "memory_libmap": [ "architecture/z1010/bram/LSRAM.txt",
                               "architecture/z1010/bram/uSRAM.txt"],
            "memory_libmap_parameters": ["-logic-cost-rom 0.5"],
            "techmap": ["architecture/z1010/bram/LSRAM_map.v",
                        "architecture/z1010/bram/uSRAM_map.v"]
        },
  "dsps": {
          "family": "microchip",
          "techmap": "../techlibs/microchip/polarfire_dsp_map.v",
          "techmap_parameters": {
                   "DSP_A_MAXWIDTH": 18,
                   "DSP_B_MAXWIDTH": 18,
                   "DSP_A_MAXWIDTH_PARTIAL": 18,
                   "DSP_A_MINWIDTH": 2,
                   "DSP_B_MINWIDTH": 2,
                   "DSP_Y_MINWIDTH": 9,
                   "DSP_SIGNEDONLY": 1,
                   "DSP_NAME": "$__MUL18X18"
          },
          "pack_command": "microchip_dsp -family polarfire"
       }
}
```
